How much holiday someone gets - Holiday entitlement - Acas

How much holiday someone gets

Calculating holiday pay

Asking for and taking holiday

Carrying over holiday

Bank holidays and Christmas

Sickness and statutory leave

Keeping records

Workers have the right to 'statutory annual leave' (paid holiday).

This is the case whether they work:

full time

part time

under a zero-hours contract

The number of days' holiday someone gets depends on:

how many days or hours they work

any extra agreements they have with their employer

Workers 'accrue' (build up) holiday from the day they start working.

This includes when someone is on:

a probationary period

sick leave

statutory leave, for example maternity, paternity, adoption or shared parental leave

Statutory paid holiday

By law, workers are entitled to 5.6 weeks' statutory paid holiday a year. Bank holidays might be included in this paid holiday. Workers should check their contract if they're not sure.

The amount of time off someone gets depends on their circumstances.

For example, to work out someone's holiday entitlement in days, multiply the number of days they work each week by 5.6. If they work 5 days a week, their statutory paid holiday is 28 days a year (5 x 5.6).

Statutory paid holiday is limited to 28 days. For example, if someone works 6 days a week they're still only entitled to 28 days of paid holiday.

Part time

Someone who works part time is still entitled to 5.6 weeks' statutory paid holiday. The entitlement will be in proportion to the hours they work. This is because part-time workers cannot be treated less favourably than full-time workers.

For example, if someone works 3 days a week, they're entitled to 16.8 days of paid holiday a year (3 x 5.6) .

If an employer gives full-time workers more paid holiday than the legal minimum, they must give part-time workers more than the legal minimum.

If someone is employed for less than a year

A worker is entitled to a proportion of a full year's holiday entitlement if their employment contract:

lasts for less than a year

ends part way through a holiday year

For example, Jo starts employment on 1 January. They work 5 days a week and get the statutory 5.6 weeks' holiday entitlement. Their employment ends after working for 26 weeks. They would have accrued 14 days of holiday at the point their employment ends.

Irregular hours workers and part-year workers

There are specific rules about holiday for irregular hours workers and part-year workers.

Find out more about holiday for irregular hours workers and part-year workers

Holiday for someone who is self-employed

Someone who is self-employed is not usually entitled to paid holiday.

However, contractors or freelancers working through an agency should check their employment status. Their employment status will affect what they're entitled to.

Find out more about self-employment

Enhanced or contractual holiday

It might be written in the contract that an employee gets more than statutory holiday entitlement. This can be called 'enhanced' or 'contractual' holiday entitlement.

Holiday that's less than a full day

An worker's holiday entitlement might include 'part days'. For example, someone might get 11.2 days of holiday because they work 2 days a week. The worker should ask their employer how to use the part day.

For example, a worker could agree with their employer to leave early or come in late to use the part day.

Employers cannot round down part days. During the first year of employment, employers must round up part days to the nearest half day. After that, they can choose to round them up, but they do not have to.

Holiday calculator

To work out how much holiday someone gets, use the holiday calculator on GOV.UK.

If someone's not sure how much holiday they should get

If a worker is not sure what their holiday entitlement is, they can:

talk with their manager, someone in HR or their employer

check their written statement of employment particulars

Contact the Acas helpline

If you have any questions about holiday entitlement, you can contact the Acas helpline.

22 April 2026

Next

Calculating holiday pay

Download this page - PDF document
Download entire guide - PDF document

PrintcloseX

Print entire guide

Share this page

Did you get the information you need from this page?

✕ Close